docs: internals: Add system fields (#801)
inveniosoftware/docs-invenio-rdm: docs/maintenance/internals/systemfield.md

# System Fields

## Overview

SystemFields is a powerful abstraction layer in InvenioRDM that provides managed access to record data through Python descriptors. It bridges the gap between the raw JSON dictionary structure of records and object-oriented Python interfaces, enabling sophisticated data management, validation, and integration with related objects.

At its core, SystemFields transforms simple attribute access (`record.title`) into complex operations that can involve:

- Data validation and transformation
- Integration with external services and databases
- Caching and performance optimization
- Record lifecycle event handling
- Denormalization and data synchronization

## Architecture and core concepts

> ### The Foundation

Reviewer: I would remove this heading as the following information doesn't need it

**Trade-offs:**
- **Complexity**: Adds abstraction layers
- **Performance Overhead**: Descriptor calls have overhead
- **Debugging Difficulty**: Magic behavior can be hard to trace
- **Learning Curve**: Requires understanding of descriptors and metaclasses

## Building your own SystemField

### Basic custom field example

```python
from invenio_records.systemfields import SystemField

class UppercaseField(SystemField):
    """A field that automatically converts values to uppercase."""

    def __get__(self, record, owner=None):
        if record is None:
            return self  # Class access

        # Get value from record dictionary
        value = self.get_dictkey(record)
        return value.upper() if value else None

    def __set__(self, record, value):
        if value is not None:
            # Store lowercase in record, display uppercase
            self.set_dictkey(record, value.lower(), create_if_missing=True)

# Usage in the your API class
class MyRecord(Record, SystemFieldsMixin):
    title = UppercaseField('metadata.title')

record = MyRecord({'metadata': {'title': 'hello world'}})
print(record.title)  # "HELLO WORLD"
record.title = "New Title"

> print(record['metadata']['title'])  # "new title"

Reviewer: nice example!

> from invenio_records.systemfields import SystemField
> 
> class UppercaseField(SystemField):
>     """A field that automatically converts values to uppercase."""
> 
>     def __get__(self, record, owner=None):
>         if record is None:
>             return self  # Class access
> 
>         # Get value from record dictionary
>         value = self.get_dictkey(record)
>         return value.upper() if value else None
> 
>     def __set__(self, record, value):
>         if value is not None:
>             # Store lowercase in record, display uppercase
>             self.set_dictkey(record, value.lower(), create_if_missing=True)
> 
> # Usage in the your API class
> class MyRecord(Record, SystemFieldsMixin):
>     title = UppercaseField('metadata.title')
> 
> record = MyRecord({'metadata': {'title': 'hello world'}})
> print(record.title)  # "HELLO WORLD"
> record.title = "New Title"
> print(record['metadata']['title'])  # "new title"

Reviewer 2: to make that good example fully self-contained (and show the class-level access result):

```suggestion
from invenio_records.api import Record
from invenio_records.systemfields import SystemField, SystemFieldsMixin

class UppercaseField(SystemField):
    """A field that automatically converts values to uppercase."""

    def __get__(self, record, owner=None):
        if record is None:
            return self  # Class-level access

        # instance-level access
        # Get value from record dictionary
        value = self.get_dictkey(record)
        return value.upper() if value else None

    def __set__(self, record, value):
        if value is not None:
            # Store lowercase in record, display uppercase
            self.set_dictkey(record, value.lower(), create_if_missing=True)

# Usage in the API class
class MyRecord(Record, SystemFieldsMixin):
    title = UppercaseField('metadata.title')

record = MyRecord({'metadata': {'title': 'hello world'}})
print(MyRecord.title)  # <__main__.UppercaseField object at 0x7b9a3ec49fd0>
print(record.title)  # "HELLO WORLD"
record.title = "New Title"
print(record['metadata']['title'])  # "new title"
```

```

### Advanced Field with Lifecycle Hooks

```python

> class TimestampField(SystemField):
>     """A field that tracks creation and modification times."""

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from invenio_records.api import Record
from invenio_records.systemfields import SystemField, SystemFieldsMixin

class TimestampField(SystemField):
    """A field that tracks creation and modification times."""
```

        self.modified_key = modified_key

    def __get__(self, record, owner=None):
        if record is None:
            return self

        return {
            'created': record.get(self.creation_key),
            'modified': record.get(self.modified_key)
        }

    def __set__(self, record, value):
        # Don't allow direct setting
        raise AttributeError("Timestamps are managed automatically")

    def post_init(self, record, data, model=None, field_data=None):
        """Set creation timestamp on new records."""
        from datetime import datetime
        now = datetime.utcnow().isoformat()

        if self.creation_key not in record:
            record[self.creation_key] = now
        record[self.modified_key] = now

    def pre_commit(self, record):
        """Update modification timestamp before saving."""
        from datetime import datetime
        record[self.modified_key] = datetime.utcnow().isoformat()

# Usage
class MyRecord(Record, SystemFieldsMixin):
    timestamps = TimestampField()

record = MyRecord({})  # Automatically sets created/modified
# ... later modifications will update modified timestamp
```

## Relations

> Relations are specialized SystemFields that manage connections between records and external entities (other records, database models, APIs, etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Relations are specialized SystemFields that manage connections between records and other entities (other records, database models, APIs, etc.).
```

### Basic Relation Concepts

Relations consist of several components:

- **RelationsField**: The main system field that manages multiple relations
- **Relation Classes**: Define how to resolve and validate specific relation types
- **Result Classes**: Handle the returned values when accessing relations

> - **Mapping Class**: Provides the interface for managing relations on a record

Reviewer 2: Can we make explicit the relationship between these classes and the concrete code below or concrete code in general? For example, RelationsField is `invenio_records.systemfields.relations.RelationsField`, a Relation class can be `PKRelation` and so on...

`Mapping Class` -> `Mapping Classes`

            else:
                raise ValueError("Date must be datetime object or ISO string")
```

### Handling Complex Objects

For complex objects that don't serialize naturally to JSON:

```python
class GeolocationField(SystemField):
    """Field for geographic coordinates."""

    class GeoPoint:
        def __init__(self, lat, lon):
            self.lat = lat
            self.lon = lon

        def to_dict(self):
            return {'lat': self.lat, 'lon': self.lon}

        @classmethod
        def from_dict(cls, data):
            return cls(data['lat'], data['lon'])

    def __get__(self, record, owner=None):
        if record is None:
            return self

        data = self.get_dictkey(record)
        if data:
            return self.GeoPoint.from_dict(data)
        return None

    def __set__(self, record, value):
        if value is not None:
            if isinstance(value, self.GeoPoint):
                self.set_dictkey(record, value.to_dict(), create_if_missing=True)
            else:
                raise ValueError("Value must be GeoPoint instance")
```

## Idempotence and Data Consistency

> SystemFields are designed to be idempotent - running the same operation multiple times should produce the same result:

Reviewer 2: They are meant to be, but there is no enforcement - it's up to the developer. So I guess it's more a matter of advising developers to respect that principle :grin: : . Not sure if any example would help for that. Perhaps a note block instead? And perhaps move it to the "Best practices" section?

            logging.warning(f"Field {self.attr_name} not found in record {record.id}")
            return None
        except Exception as e:
            # Handle unexpected errors gracefully
            import logging
            logging.error(f"Error accessing field {self.attr_name}: {e}")
            return None

    def __set__(self, record, value):
        try:
            self.set_dictkey(record, value, create_if_missing=True)
        except Exception as e:
            logging.error(f"Error setting field {self.attr_name}: {e}")
            raise ValueError(f"Could not set {self.attr_name}: {e}")
```

## Conclusion

SystemFields provide a powerful abstraction for managing complex record behavior in InvenioRDM. They enable:

- Clean separation between data storage and business logic
- Automatic integration with record lifecycle events
- Performance optimization through caching and denormalization
- Type safety and validation
- Integration with external systems and services

When designing SystemFields, consider:

- The JSON serialization format
- Performance implications of your operations
- Idempotence and data consistency
- Error handling and debugging
- Testing strategies

> By following these patterns and best practices, you can create robust, maintainable SystemFields that enhance your InvenioRDM instance's capabilities while maintaining clean, readable code.

Reviewer 2: This section is for maintainers and core developers rather than instance operators:

- we can either skip the Conclusion section completely (not really an essay or an AI answer right? haha)
-  Or
- 
```suggestion
By following these patterns and best practices, you can create robust, maintainable System fields that enhance InvenioRDM's capabilities while maintaining clean, readable code.
```
